docs: make wasm documentation visible for users (#13139)
scylladb/scylladb: docs/kb/wasm.rst

=======================================
Wasm support for user-defined functions
=======================================

> This document describes the details of Wasm language support in user-defined functions (UDF). The language ``wasm`` is one of the possible languages to use, besides Lua, to implement these functions.

Author: > Also, I suggest you add a link of UDF back to the CQL document describing UDF - someone might get to this page first.

Ok

> @annastuchlik @wmitros what is the philosophy behind the "kb" (knowledgebase) directory? What is the rationale for not putting this file in docs/cql? I understand why you want to put this information in a separate file, but why should it be in a separate directory?

At the first glance it looked like to me that the `cql` directory is only for the "top level" documents about cql, but now I see that it also includes pages like [JSON support](https://docs.scylladb.com/stable/cql/json.html#), so the wasm documentation also probably fits better there (I'm not exactly sure about what should end up in the "kb" directory either).

> .. note:: Until Scylla 5.2, the Wasm language is called ``xwasm``. This name will be replaced with ``wasm`` in Scylla 5.3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:: Until ScyllaDB 5.2, the Wasm language is called ``xwasm``. The name is replaced with ``wasm`` in ScyllaDB 5.3.
```

Reviewer: Let's not make the reference to the future as the documentation is going to be published in version 5.3.

Author: Ok

How to generate a correct Wasm UDF source code
----------------------------------------------

> Scylla accepts UDF's source code in WebAssembly text format - also known as ``WAT``. The source can use and define whatever's needed for execution, including multiple helper functions and symbols. The requirements for it to be accepted as correct UDF source is that the WebAssembly module exports a symbol with the same name as the function, this symbol's type is indeed a function with correct signature, the module exports a ``_scylla_abi`` global and all symbols related to the selected ABI version.

Reviewer 2: Maybe also link to the section below that explains the ABI versions?

> Scylla accepts UDF's source code in WebAssembly text format - also known as ``WAT``. The source can use and define whatever's needed for execution, including multiple helper functions and symbols. The requirements for it to be accepted as correct UDF source is that the WebAssembly module exports a symbol with the same name as the function, this symbol's type is indeed a function with correct signature, the module exports a ``_scylla_abi`` global and all symbols related to the selected ABI version.

Author: I applied all 3 suggestions

> UDF's source code can be, naturally, simply coded by hand in ``WAT``. It is not often very convenient to program directly in assembly, so here are a few tips.

Author: It would make sense to put an WAT example after mentioning that it can be written by hand, but we expect most users won't want to do anything with the WAT code, and just generate it using the available tools (the Rust helper library) instead. Because of that, I'd like to have that example as the first one on the page.

Compiling to Wasm
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Rust
....

The main supported language for Wasm UDFs is Rust. To generate WebAssembly from rust, it's best to use the `scylla-udf <https://github.com/scylladb/scylla-rust-udf>`_ Rust helper library, and follow the instructions present there.

As a short example, here's a sample Rust code which can be compiled to WebAssembly:

.. code-block:: rust

    use scylla_udf::export_udf;

    #[export_udf]
    pub fn fib(n: i32) -> i32 {
        if n < 2 {
            n
        } else {
            fib(n - 1) + fib(n - 2)
        }
    }

> The compilation instructions are described at https://github.com/scylladb/scylla-rust-udf but the commands will generally be:

Author: It seems to work for me as is after generating the docs using `make preview`

> The compilation instructions are described at https://github.com/scylladb/scylla-rust-udf but the commands will generally be:

Author: Actually, I just tried to use them and either I'm doing something wrong, or simply adding angle brackets doesn't work (they are being displayed in the final document). Maybe I'll just leave them as is

> The compilation instructions are described at https://github.com/scylladb/scylla-rust-udf but the commands will generally be:

Reviewer 2: Ok, I guess I was misremembering. Maybe they wanted me to add angle brackets in .md, not .rst. Sorry about the waste of time.

for memory management.

However, there is no C helper library yet, so implementing UDFs in C is in general much more difficult than in Rust.
Just to implement the fib() function, you need something like this:

.. code-block:: c

    #include<stdlib.h>

    const int WASM_PAGE_SIZE = 64 * 1024;

    const int _scylla_abi = 2;

    void* _scylla_malloc(int size) {
        return malloc(size);
    }

    void _scylla_free(void* ptr) {
        free(ptr);
    }

    static long long swap_int64(long long val) {
        val = ((val << 8) & 0xFF00FF00FF00FF00ULL ) | ((val >> 8) & 0x00FF00FF00FF00FFULL );
        val = ((val << 16) & 0xFFFF0000FFFF0000ULL ) | ((val >> 16) & 0x0000FFFF0000FFFFULL );
        return (val << 32) | ((val >> 32) & 0xFFFFFFFFULL);
    }

    long long fib_aux(long long n) {
        if (n < 2) {
            return n;
        }
        return fib_aux(n-1) + fib_aux(n-2);
    }

    long long fib(long long p) {
        int size = p >> 32;
        long long* p_val = (long long*)(p & 0xffffffff);
        // Initialize memory for the return value
        long long* ret_val = _scylla_malloc(sizeof(long long));
        if (size == -1) {

>             *ret_val = swap_int64(42);

Reviewer 2: What's 42? The meaning of life? :-) I don't understand what this case does.

>             *ret_val = swap_int64(42);

Author: I only now see that it actually makes no sense with current description (I thought you were referring to the `swap` calls). The example was supposed to perform some special action when encountering a NULL instead of also returning NULL (we have a `RETURNS NULL ON NULL INPUT` clause for that), so we returned a special value 42 for that instead.

I think I'll use a different example for the Rust function, so that there is no confusion about

>             *ret_val = swap_int64(42);

Author: I only now see that it actually makes no sense with current description (I thought you were referring to the swap calls). The example was supposed to perform some special action when encountering a `NULL` instead of also returning `NULL` (we have a `RETURNS NULL ON NULL INPUT` clause for that), so we returned a special value 42 for that instead.

I think I'll use a different example for the Rust function, so that there is no confusion about comparing it to the C code. It will probably also make more sense, because the current example is relatively easy also in C, but the new one will actually make use of the Rust helper macro capabilities

        } else {

>             *ret_val = swap_int64(fib_aux(swap_int64(*p_val)));

Author: This swap looks strange but it actually just swaps the byte order of the 64 bit int. We're doing this because we decided to use the serialization from Scylla for writing values into the Wasm memory, and we also swap the bye order in Scylla. Would it be better if I renamed the "swap" to for example `ntohll`?

In that case, the ``_scylla_free`` and ``_scylla_malloc`` don't need to be exported, ``_scylla_abi`` can be set to 1, and parameters/returns are not serialized:

.. code-block:: c

    const int _scylla_abi = 1;

    long long fib(int n) {
        if (n < 2) {
            return n;
        }
        return fib(n-1) + fib(n-2);
    }

    // using wasi in c/c++ requires adding a main function to the program
    int main(){}

Compilation instructions:

.. code-block:: bash

    /path/to/wasm/supporting/c/compiler --sysroot=/path/to/wasi/sysroot -O2  --target=wasm32-wasi -Wl,--export=fib -Wl,--export=_scylla_abi -Wl,--no-entry fib.c -o fib.wasm
    wasm2wat fibnull.wasm > fibnull.wat

The compiled example can be viewed at test/cql-pytest/test_wasm.py::test_docs_c

AssemblyScript
..............

AssemblyScript is a TypeScript-like language that compiles to WebAsembly.

Install via npm:

.. code-block:: bash

    npm install -g assemblyscript

Example source code:

.. code-block:: typescript

    export const _scylla_abi = [1]
    export function fib(n: i32): i32 {
    if (n < 2) {
        return n
    }
    return fib(n - 1) + fib(n - 2)
    }

> Compile directly to WebAssembly Text Format with:

Author: Ok

.. code-block:: cql

    scylla@cqlsh:ks> CREATE TABLE t(id int, n bigint, PRIMARY KEY(id,n));
    scylla@cqlsh:ks> INSERT INTO t(id, n) VALUES (0, 0);
    scylla@cqlsh:ks> INSERT INTO t(id, n) VALUES (0, 1);
    scylla@cqlsh:ks> INSERT INTO t(id, n) VALUES (0, 2);
    scylla@cqlsh:ks> INSERT INTO t(id, n) VALUES (0, 3);
    scylla@cqlsh:ks> INSERT INTO t(id, n) VALUES (0, 4);
    scylla@cqlsh:ks> INSERT INTO t(id, n) VALUES (0, 5);
    scylla@cqlsh:ks> SELECT n, ks.fib(n) FROM t;

    n  | ks.fib(n)
    ----+-----------
     0 |         0
     1 |         1
     2 |         1
     3 |         2
     4 |         3
     5 |         5

    (11 rows)

Experimental status
-------------------

WebAssembly UDFs are still experimental due to insufficient testing. If backwards incompatible changes
to the ABI are implemented in the future, they should be submitted as new ABI-versions, and use the same
``LANGUAGE wasm`` clause in the CQL statements.

ABI versions
------------

Different programming languages may require different ABIs. To support that, the Wasm program is required to
export the symbol ``_scylla_abi``, that is a WebAssembly global with a 32-bit value of the offset in memory,

> where the version number can be read (that's the only method of exporting a constant in Rust).

Reviewer 2: I don't understand the reason for this weird convention, or why Rust is relevant?

Author: Is this convention that weird (maybe I just described it weirdly)? I also think that it would be best if we could just export a global with the expected value, but neither C or Rust code gets compiled to that, probably because this approach also works with types other than an integer.

Currently, the only available ABI versions are 1 and 2. Both of them use the same protocol for passing

> parameters and returning values, but they differ in approaches to memory management.

Reviewer 2: Reading the above sections which used ABI 1 instead of 2, I got the impression that version 1 and 2 also differ in the need to "serialize" and/or "byte-swap" values, and also the handling of nulls. Was this impression incorrect?

Author: All the things that you've mentioned are actually the same in both ABIs. I see now that I made the examples a bit confusing, because the example with "byte-swaps" is for a `CALLED ON NUL INPUT` UDF, and the simple example is for a `RETURNS NULL ON NULL INPUT` UDF.

If the first example wasn't `CALLED ON NUL INPUT`, it would not require the "byte-swaps", but it would still need to include `_scylla_malloc` and `_scylla_free` implementations. 

I'll try to highlight that difference in the rebase, so that users don't get the same impression, but I'm not sure if it will be enough to stop being confusing

Memory management
-----------------

> The memory management differs depending on the used ABI verison:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The memory management differs depending on the used ABI version:
```

Author: Ok

* version 1

>     There are no requirements of the usage of memory by the user. The host grows memory for each of parameters and does not free the memory in any way.

Reviewer 2: each of **the** parameters?

Author: Ok

* version 2
    The user program is required to export ``_scylla_malloc`` and ``_scylla_free`` methods, which
    are then used by the host for allocating memory for parameters and freeing memory for the returned value.
    The user is required to free the memory allocated for parameters using the ``_scylla_free`` method, and allocate the memory for result using the ``_scylla_malloc`` method (both can be achieved by using the provided helper libraries).
    Alternatively, the user may return one of the arguments, shifting the responsibility of freeing it to the host.

>     The ``_scylla_malloc`` and ``_scylla_free`` methods may be simple wrappers of ``malloc`` and ``free`` methods implemented by default when compiling with WASI.

Reviewer 2: Do these functions even need to be defined? Can't they just be "extern"? If it's just extern it will be clearer that the definition doesn't matter - it's Scylla that implements these functions, no?

Reviewer 2: So I guess I just don't understand how this works. If _scylla_malloc() is defined as calling malloc(), where does this malloc() come from, from Scylla and its shared libraries? Can the user call **any** function whatsoever from UDF? Isn't this a security problem? For example, the user can create a call to system("rm -rf /")? It doesn't make sense we want to allow that.

Author: This malloc appears in the Wasm module when compiling to the wasm32-wasi target (in fact, it is often a big part of the entire module when compiling simple functions). You can actually even see it here: https://github.com/scylladb/scylladb/blob/8ceb8b0240721ea1bf938a39f28eb49b34e01233/test/resource/wasm/return_input.wat#L14-L17
It doesn't use system calls, instead it operates only on the Wasm Memory. We can export some functions from the host to the Wasm module, but we have to do it explicitly and currently we're not exporting any.

Reviewer 2: Wow, now I understand.. So, it seems the library (is it your library or clang's?) contains an implementation of `malloc()` which does the right (and safe) thing. 
So, why do we want to force the user to define `_scylla_malloc` to call `malloc()`? Does it ever make sense to define it to anything else? If we know the library must implement `malloc()`, why doesn't Scylla just call that instead of `scylla_malloc`?

Author: We decided on it quite some time ago already, but I remember that the first reason was that there were problems with exporting the generated `malloc` from Wasm, and the other one is to let the user (or ourselves in a helper library) use their own allocator (compiling to wasm32-wasi is not strictly required by us, but it's recommended due to the presence of this `malloc`)

Reviewer 2: Ok. I understood none of that while reading the document, but maybe I only cared about this as a developer, and not a "user" who would just use the instructions and not stop to think about every little detail why it has to be like that.

Author: Yes, not all intentions were described in the doc, but even if they did, I guess we would leave them in the docs/dev. And as you mentioned, we do expect users to keep using using the Rust helper library which hides all the internals away from the user
